README.md, before:

# `osbp_detect`

`osbp_detect` allows for the detection of single unassisted oligonucleotide
translocation events from ONT bulk FAST5 files.

While the pipeline has been developed with the objective to detect and report
translocations of Osmium-labelled oligonucleotides using Oxford Nanopore
devices, the algorithm in its current form can also be used for the detection of
any small molecule traversing any nanopore.

## Quick start

1. Install Homebrew and the `just` task runner via
   [`docs/install-requirements.md`](docs/install-requirements.md).
2. Complete the repo setup steps in [`docs/instructions.md`](docs/instructions.md)
   (create the virtual environment, install dependencies, verify activation).
3. Refer to the CLI/GUI sections below—or the same instructions doc—for the
   commands used to run detections and export TSVs.

## Contributors

- Anastassia Kanavarioti (tessi.kanavarioti@gmail.com)
- Albert Kang (swk30@cam.ac.uk)
- Garret Grant (garret.grant.swe@gmail.com)

## How it works

Let _y_ be an ordered sequence of real values representing a typical time-series
obtained from a Nanopore device.

We initially categorise regions of _y_ into one of two states: current from an
open channel, _Io_, where nothing is passing through the Nanopore, and the
residual current when some translocation event is taking place, _Ir_.

The _Io_ is first established by taking the median of the signals between a
pre-defined lower and upper bound of the predicted open current.

Generally, the sharp transitions between the _Io_ and _Ir_ states permit the use
of a rule-based parser to define the single translocation event of a molecule,
where various thresholds can be hand-crafted to a particular application.

Our simplistic approach makes use of three conditions whose key parameters are
outlined in the figure below:

![single_transloc](img/osbp_detect_alg.png)

## Run GUI

`just run-gui`

## CLI parameters

```
usage: run.py [-h] -i FAST5 [-r CHANNEL_RANGE | -s CHANNEL_SPECIFIC]
              [-b BLACKLIST] [--duration MIN MAX]
              [--min-irio MIN_IRIO] [--strict-irio STRICT_IRIO]
              [-o TSV] [--output-clean TSV] [--output-skipped TSV]
              [--max-events-clean MAX_EVENTS_CLEAN]

Detect events corresponding to short, single miRNA translocations

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i FAST5, --input FAST5
                        Path to input FAST5 file
  -r CHANNEL_RANGE, --range CHANNEL_RANGE
                        Channel range to analyse, start-end (end exclusive)
  -s CHANNEL_SPECIFIC, --channels CHANNEL_SPECIFIC
                        Specific channels, comma-separated (e.g. 1,4,8)
  -b BLACKLIST, --blacklist BLACKLIST
                        Channels to skip, comma-separated (applied after
                        range/selection)
  --duration MIN MAX    Event duration window in timepoints (default:
                        (4, 1200))
  --min-irio MIN_IRIO   Minimum Ir/Io threshold (default: 0.55)
  --strict-irio STRICT_IRIO
                        Strict Ir/Io threshold applied to all samples
                        (default: 0.6)
  -o TSV, --output TSV
                        Output TSV for all detected events (default:
                        <input>.detections.tsv)
  --output-clean TSV    Output TSV excluding channels with too many events
                        (default: <input>.detections.cleaned.tsv)
  --output-skipped TSV  Output TSV listing channels excluded from the cleaned
                        output (default: <input>.detections.skipped.tsv)
  --max-events-clean MAX_EVENTS_CLEAN
                        Max events per channel to keep in cleaned output
                        (default: 20000)
```

## Example CLI

`python3 run.py -i ../../Datasets/minion/20190718_miRNA21_40min_200mV.fast5 -r 1-64`

## Reference

Sultan, M. and Kanavarioti, A., 2019. Nanopore device-based fingerprinting of
RNA oligos and microRNAs enhanced with an Osmium tag. Scientific reports, 9(1),
pp.1-18. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-50459-8

Commit message:

chore: update output files with fast5 name, open output dir

README.md, after:

# `osbp_detect`

`osbp_detect` allows for the detection of single unassisted oligonucleotide
translocation events from ONT bulk FAST5 files.

While the pipeline has been developed with the objective to detect and report
translocations of Osmium-labelled oligonucleotides using Oxford Nanopore
devices, the algorithm in its current form can also be used for the detection of
any small molecule traversing any nanopore.

## Quick start

1. Install Homebrew and the `just` task runner via
   [`docs/install-requirements.md`](docs/install-requirements.md).
2. Complete the repo setup steps in [`docs/instructions.md`](docs/instructions.md)
   (create the virtual environment, install dependencies, verify activation).
3. Refer to the CLI/GUI sections below—or the same instructions doc—for the
   commands used to run detections and export TSVs.

## Contributors

- Anastassia Kanavarioti (tessi.kanavarioti@gmail.com)
- Albert Kang (swk30@cam.ac.uk)
- Garret Grant (garret.grant.swe@gmail.com)

## How it works

Let _y_ be an ordered sequence of real values representing a typical time-series
obtained from a Nanopore device.

We initially categorise regions of _y_ into one of two states: current from an
open channel, _Io_, where nothing is passing through the Nanopore, and the
residual current when some translocation event is taking place, _Ir_.

The _Io_ is first established by taking the median of the signals between a
pre-defined lower and upper bound of the predicted open current.

Generally, the sharp transitions between the _Io_ and _Ir_ states permit the use
of a rule-based parser to define the single translocation event of a molecule,
where various thresholds can be hand-crafted to a particular application.

Our simplistic approach makes use of three conditions whose key parameters are
outlined in the figure below:

![single_transloc](img/osbp_detect_alg.png)

## Run GUI

`just run-gui`

GUI runs create a timestamped output folder in the selected output directory
named `dd-mm-yy_HH:MM:SS_osbp_result` using PST time. If that folder already
exists (rare, since it requires two runs at the exact same second), an
incrementing suffix is added (e.g., `_2`).

## CLI parameters

```
usage: run.py [-h] -i FAST5 [-r CHANNEL_RANGE | -s CHANNEL_SPECIFIC]
              [-b BLACKLIST] [--duration MIN MAX]
              [--min-irio MIN_IRIO] [--strict-irio STRICT_IRIO]
              [-o TSV] [--output-clean TSV] [--output-skipped TSV]
              [--max-events-clean MAX_EVENTS_CLEAN]

Detect events corresponding to short, single miRNA translocations

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i FAST5, --input FAST5
                        Path to input FAST5 file
  -r CHANNEL_RANGE, --range CHANNEL_RANGE
                        Channel range to analyse, start-end (end exclusive)
  -s CHANNEL_SPECIFIC, --channels CHANNEL_SPECIFIC
                        Specific channels, comma-separated (e.g. 1,4,8)
  -b BLACKLIST, --blacklist BLACKLIST
                        Channels to skip, comma-separated (applied after
                        range/selection)
  --duration MIN MAX    Event duration window in timepoints (default:
                        (4, 1200))
  --min-irio MIN_IRIO   Minimum Ir/Io threshold (default: 0.55)
  --strict-irio STRICT_IRIO
                        Strict Ir/Io threshold applied to all samples
                        (default: 0.6)
  -o TSV, --output TSV
                        Output TSV for all detected events (default:
                        <input>.detections.tsv)
  --output-clean TSV    Output TSV excluding channels with too many events
                        (default: <input>.detections.cleaned.tsv)
  --output-skipped TSV  Output TSV listing channels excluded from the cleaned
                        output (default: <input>.detections.skipped.tsv)
  --max-events-clean MAX_EVENTS_CLEAN
                        Max events per channel to keep in cleaned output
                        (default: 20000)
```

## Example CLI

`python3 run.py -i ../../Datasets/minion/20190718_miRNA21_40min_200mV.fast5 -r 1-64`

## Reference

Sultan, M. and Kanavarioti, A., 2019. Nanopore device-based fingerprinting of
RNA oligos and microRNAs enhanced with an Osmium tag. Scientific reports, 9(1),
pp.1-18. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-50459-8
